## Does humanitarian assistance reduce population mortality? Propensity score analysis for Nigeria, Somalia and South Sudan
Francesco Checchi

francesco.checchi@lshtm.ac.uk

London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine

Funding support: Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance (ALNAP). Support for collection of datasets used here came from the 
United States Institute of Peace, UK Foreign Commonwealth and Development Office and UK Research and Innovation.

# Explanation of R analysis scripts and input data files

## Background
This repository contains R scripts and input datasets/parameter files (all .xslx or .csv) needed to replicate analysis of the effect of humanitarian assistance on mortality in Somalia (2016-2018).

## Requirements for analysis replication
Datasets/parameter files and R script files must be stored on the same folder, where output files will be saved. The `survey_datasets.zip` file should be unzipped to a `/survey_datasets/` sub-folder. The directory for reading files is set automatically while the control code is run. It is recommended to run the code from the open-source [RStudio](https://rstudio.com/) interface.

## Description of input data/parameter files
[xxx] refers to the country code - in this case, `som` for Somalia.

*	`[xxx]_analysis_strata.xlsx`, which simply contains the list of administrative level 0 (if needed), 1 (e.g. state/region) and 2 (e.g. district/county) geographical strata; further levels may be added, in which case corresponding parameters should also be added under the <general_parameters> worksheet of `[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx`;
*	`[xxx]_survey_metadata.xlsx`, which contains unique IDs and various meta-variables for each SMART survey included in the analysis;
*	Individual raw datasets of SMART surveys, as exported using [ENA software](https://smartmethodology.org/survey-planning-tools/smart-emergency-nutrition-assessment/) into .csv format (these should be named as per the unique survey ID variable in the `[xxx]_survey_metadata.xlsx` file, and stored in a sub-directory that must be called [survey_datasets](/survey_datasets/); no modifications are needed on the ENA-exported datasets, but we have encountered occasional errors (e.g. non-numeric entries or lone non-empty cells in unmarked columns). Somalia survey datasets are fully clean, but if data from a new crisis are analysed, errors such as the above, if not previously cleaned, will probably throw an error during execution of script 1, necessitating some investigation and manual data cleaning (script 1 will show the survey ID where the error occurs);
*	`[xxx]_predictor_data_alnap.xlsx`: this file contains a master table of all predictor datasets, with characteristics of each and options for how to manage them (script 3), including reshaping and aggregation, imputation, smoothing, interpolation, creation of lags, etc.;
*	`[xxx]_demog_data.xlsx`: while script 2 (population reconstruction) as mentioned below will need to be developed for each crisis, maintaining the same data input structure as shown in the sample dataset is recommended to avoid script execution problems; generally this will include a table of all population and displacement datasets used, a worksheet with specific demographic parameters (e.g. birth rate), and the datasets themselves;
*	`[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx`: this is the main file enabling the user to interact with the analysis, and consists of a <general_parameters> worksheet (needed for all scripts) where various parameters needed across the analysis are declared; a <predictor_parameters> worksheet wherein all variables to be considered in model fitting should be listed, with options to force their inclusion or exclusion, retain specific lags, categorise them, consider them in interaction terms, etc.;

Generally, dictionaries within each file are not just informational, but also determine which specific variables within each worksheet are read by the scripts. As such, they should be modified with care, and any additional variable or parameter added to any worksheet should be reflected within the corresponding dictionary.

## Description of R scripts
Notes: 
* Required data inputs does not include various additional datasets and R objects that will have been generated by a previous script, and be read in automatically._
* `[xxx]` indicates the country code, e.g. som for Somalia, ssd for South Sudan, etc.

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_0_control_code.R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - install R packages; <br> - read input datasets; <br> - read and declare parameters; <br> - source other dependent scripts (below) | - `[xxx]_analysis_strata.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_survey_metadata.xlsx` <br> - Individual raw datasets of SMART surveys (see above) <br> - `[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_predictor_data_alnap.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_demog_data.xlsx` | none |

Note: Any dependent script can also run by executing the script itself or a portion of it.

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_0_functions.R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - declare bespoke functions used by different scripts |  | none |

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_1_manage_surveys.R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - reanalyse each survey and estimate additional demographic indicators; <br> - explore survey availability across crisis person-time; <br> - prepare survey observations for further analysis steps | - `[xxx]_survey_metadata.xlsx` <br> - Individual raw datasets of SMART surveys (see above) | - Re-analysed survey estimates <br> - Graphs and table of descriptive survey patterns <br> - Merged and reshaped survey observations |

Note: Would need to be modified if mortality sources other than SMART surveys are introduced.

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_2_reconstruct_pop_som_[xxx].R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - reconstruct population denominators for each stratum by combining census estimates, internal displacement and refugee data; <br> - estimate the proportion of IDPs as well as in- and out-migration rates | - `[xxx]_analysis_strata.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_demog_data.xlsx` | - Reconstructed population (including under 5y) denominators and IDP figures / proportions <br> - Graphs of trends in denominators |

Note: This script is country-specific at present.

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_3_manage_predictors.R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - merge predictors into one time series; <br> - transform predictor values into rate; <br> - visualise completeness and apply completeness cut-offs; <br> - perform specified manual and automated imputations; <br> - compute rolling means and lags; <br> - smooth and/or interpolate; <br> - prepare datasets for model fitting | - `[xxx]_analysis_strata.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_predictor_data_alnap.xlsx`| - Graphs of completeness and smoothed time series <br> - Predictor values for each kt stratum <br> - Average predictor values over the recall period of each survey (or survey stratum) |

#### :ballot_box_with_check: `ha_impact_4_estimate_effect.R`

| Sub-steps implemented | Required data inputs | Outputs |
| --------------------- | -------------------- | ------- |
| - load previous output files; <br> - merge predictors and mortality data; <br> - compute generalised propensity scores; <br> - check balance of confounders with and without adjustment by GPS; <br> - compute dose-response association between exposure and outcome | - `[xxx]_analysis_parameters.xlsx` <br> - `[xxx]_predictor_data_alnap.xlsx` | - Graphs and tables of confounder balance <br> - Estimates of association and dose-response graphs |


